---
layout: default
parent: MQTT API
title: Write
nav_order: 30
permalink: /docs/api-mqtt/write
has_children: false
---

# MQTT Write API

The examples below shows how to efficiently write data with mqtt client (`mosquitto_pub`)

## Multiple records in a publish

```sh
mosquitto_pub -h 127.0.0.1 -p 5653 -u user -P pass \
    -t db/append/TAGDATA \
    -f ./mqtt-data.json
```

```json
[
    [ "my-car", 1670380342000000000, 32.1 ],
    [ "my-car", 1670380343000000000, 65.4 ],
    [ "my-car", 1670380344000000000, 76.5 ]
]
```

Payload form of above example is array of tuple (array of array in JSON), 
it appends the table with multiple records received through a mqtt message.
It is also possible to publish single tuple like below. 
Machbase Neo accepts both types of payload via mqtt.

## Single tuple data

```sh
mosquitto_pub -h 127.0.0.1 -p 5653 -u user -P pass \
    -t db/append/TAGDATA \
    -m '[ "my-car", 1670380342000000000, 32.1 ]'
```

Since MQTT is connection oriented protocol, a client program can continuously send data while it keeps the same mqtt session.
It is the real benefit for using MQTT instead of HTTP for writing data.

{: .important }
> In this example, we use `mosquitto_pub` just for demonstration.
> Since it makes a connection to MQTT server and close when it finishes to publish a single message.
> You will barely see performance gains of `append` feature against HTTP `write` api.
>
> Use this MQTT method only when a client can keep a connection relatively long time and send multiple messages.

## Max message size limit

The maximum size of payload in a PUBILSH message is 256MB by MQTT specification. If a malcious or malfunctioning client sends large messages continuously it can consume all of network bandwidth and computing resource of server side then it may lead server to out of service status. It is good practice to adjust max message limit that holds just big enough for your demand. The default mqtt max message size is 1MB (`1048576`), you can adjust this value by command line flag or `MaxMessageSizeLimit` in the configuration file.

```sh
machbase-neo server --mqtt-max-message 1048576
```
