---
layout: default
parent: TQL API
title: Basics
nav_order: 01
permalink: /docs/api-tql/basics
has_children: false
---

# Basics
{: .no_toc}

1. TOC
{: toc}

## Primitive types

TQL has three types for primitive `string`, `number` and `boolean`.

### `string`
{: .no_toc}

Define constant strings as like traditional programming languages with quation marks, single('), double (") and backtick(`).
The backtick'ed string is usuful when you need to define a string in multiple lines including quation marks inside such as long SQL statement.


*Example)* Escaping single quote with backslash(`\'`)

```js
INPUT( SQL( 'select * from example where name=\'temperature\' limit 10' ))
```

*Example)* Use multi-lines sql statement without escaping by backtick(`)

```js
INPUT( SQL( `select * 
             from example 
             where name='temperature'
             limit 10` ))
```

### `number`
{: .no_toc}

TQL treats all numberic constants as 64bit floating number.

```js
INPUT( QUERY( 'value', from('example', 'temperature'), limit(10)))
```

```js
INPUT( FAKE( oscillator( freq(12.34, 20)) ))
```

### `boolean`
{: .no_toc}

`true` and `false`

```js
OUTPUT( CSV( heading(false) ))
```

## Statements

Every statement in TQL should be a function call except the literal constants of string, number and boolean.

```js
// A comment line starts with '//'

// Each statement should start from first column.
INPUT(
    QUERY(
        'value',
        from('example', 'temperature'),
        limit(10)
    )
)
OUTPUT(CSV())
```

## INPUT() and OUTPUT()

Every `.tql` script should start with `INPUT()` statement and end with `OUTPUT()`. And they should be only once, any redundant `INPUT()`, `OUTPUT()` raise an runtime error.

## MAP functions

There may be zero or more map functions between `INPUT()` and `OUTPUT()`.
The names of all map functions are with capital letters, in contrast lower case named functions are used as arguments of the other map functions.

```js
INPUT(
    QUERY(
        'value',
        from('example', 'temperature'),
        limit(10)
    )
)
DROP(5)
TAKE(5)
OUTPUT(CSV())
```

## Query Param

When other applications call a .tql script via HTTP it can supply variables as query parameters.
The variables from query params start with '$' sign in a script as below example.

If the script saved as 'hello2.tql', applications can call the script by HTTP GET method with `http://127.0.0.1:5654/db/tql/hello2.tql?name=temperature&count=10`

```js
INPUT( QUERY( 'value', from('example', $name), limit( $count )) )
OUTPUT(CSV())
```

## ?? Operator

`??` operator takes left and right operand. if left operand is defined it returns value of it, if left operand is not defined it returns right operand instead.
The example below shows the common use case of the `??` operator. If caller did not provide query param variables, the right side operand will be taken as a default value.

```js
INPUT( 
    QUERY(
        'value',
        from('example', $name ?? 'temperature'),
        limit( $count ?? 10 )
    )
)
OUTPUT(CSV())
```