---
layout: default
parent: TQL API
title: INPUT
nav_order: 11
has_children: false
---

{: .warning }
> While TQL is in beta stage, all functions and syntax are subject to change.

# INPUT()
{: .no_toc}

*Syntax*: `INPUT( SQL() | QUERY() | CSV() | FAKE() )`

All *tql* scripts must start with `INPUT()` function that takes a source function as a parameter.


1. TOC
{: toc}

## SQL()

*Syntax*: `SQL( sqltext )`

- `sqltext` `string` : SQL SELECT statement to retrieve data from database. Use backtick(`) for multi-line sql string.

*Example*

```
INPUT(
    SQL (`
        SELECT time, value 
        FROM example 
        WHERE name ='temperature'
        LIMIT 10000
    `)
)
```

## QUERY()

*Syntax*: `QUERY( fields..., from(), between() [, limit()] )`

- `fields` `string` : column names, multiple columns are possible.

*QUERY()* source function provides same functionality with *SQL()*, but it simplifies the usage by standardization option functions other than using the raw SQL statement.

This function actully works equivalent to `SQL()` but it takes query conditions via simplified functions instead of SQL statement.
It assigns time range condition easier way than using `WHERE` condition in SQL statement.

The example below procudes data by query `SELECT time, value FROM example WHERE NAME = 'temperature' AND time BETWEEN...`.
The base 'time' column will be always first column of the SELECT query, even it is not specified in *fields* arguments.

```
INPUT(
    QUERY(
        'value',
        from('example', 'temperature'),
        between('last-10s', 'last')
    )
)
```

### from()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `from( table, tag [, base_time_column] )`

It provides table name and tag name to `QUERY()` function generating SQL internally. It may equivalent to `... FROM <table> WHERE NAME = <tag> ...`.

- `table` `string` table name
- `tag` `string` tag name
- `base_time_column` `string` specify "time" column name, if omitted default is `'time'`.

### between()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `between( fromTime, toTime [, period] )`

It provides time range condition to `QUERY()` function generating SQL internally.
It may equivalent to `... WHERE ... TIME BETWEEN <fromTime> AND <toTime>...`.

- `fromTime` `string|number` time expressesion with 'now' and 'last' as string, Or assign number as unix epoch time in nanosecond
- `toTime` `string|number` time expression
- `period` `string|number` duration expression, Or assign number for the unix epoch time in nanoseconds. Logically only positive period makes sense.

You can specify `fromTime` and `toTime` with 'now' and 'last' with delta duration expression. 
For example, `'now-1h30m'` specifies the time that 1 hour 30 minutes before from now.
`'last-30s'` means 30 seconds before the lastest(=max) time of the `base_time_coolumn`.

If `period` is specified it will generate 'GROUP BY' experssion with aggregation SQL functions.

### limit()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `limit( [offset ,] count )`

It will be translated into `SELECT... LIMIT offset, count` statement.

- `offset` `number` default is `0`. if omitted
- `count` `number`

<!--### DUMP() -->

## CSV()

*TO DO*

## FAKE()

*Syntax*: `FAKE( oscilator() )`

Genrating "fake" data by given method. For now only `oscilator()` is available.

### oscilator()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `oscilator( freq() [, freq()...], range() )`

Generating wave data by given frequency and time range. If provide multiple `freq()` arguments, it composites waves.

### freq()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `freq( frequency, amplitude [, bias, phase])`

It produce sine wave by time `amplitude * SIN( 2*Pi * frequency * time + phase) + bias`.

- `frequence` `number` frequency in Hertz (Hz).
- `amplitude` `number`
- `bias` `number`
- `phase` `number` in radian

### range()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `range( baseTime, deltaDuration, duration )`

It specifies time range from `basetime+deltaDuration` to `baseTime+deltaDuration+duration`.

- `baseTime` `string|number` 'now' and 'last' is available for string type, Or assign number as unix epoch time in nanosecond
- `deltaDuration` `string|number` duration expression, Or assign number for the unix epoch time in nanoseconds. ex) `'-1d2h30m'`, `'1s100ms'`
- `duration` `string|number` duration expression, Or assign number for the unix epoch time in nanoseconds. Logically only positive period makes sense.
