---
layout: default
parent: TQL API
title: Source
nav_order: 11
has_children: false
---

# Data source
{: .no_toc}

*Syntax*: `SQL() | QUERY() | CSV() | FAKE()`

All *tql* scripts must start with one of the data source functions.


1. TOC
{: toc}

## SQL()

*Syntax*: `SQL( [bridge, ] sqltext )`

- `bridge` *bridge('name')* If a bridge is given, the SQL query is executed on the bridge
- `sqltext` *string* : SQL SELECT statement to retrieve data from database. Use backtick(`) for multi-line sql string.

*Example*

```js
SQL (`
    SELECT time, value 
    FROM example 
    WHERE name ='temperature'
    LIMIT 10000
`)
```

## QUERY()

*Syntax*: `QUERY( fields..., from(), between() [, limit()] )`

- `fields` `string` : column names, multiple columns are possible.

*QUERY()* source function provides same functionality with *SQL()*, but it simplifies the usage by standardization option functions other than using the raw SQL statement.

This function actully works equivalent to `SQL()` but it takes query conditions via simplified functions instead of SQL statement.
It assigns time range condition easier way than using `WHERE` condition in SQL statement.

The example below procudes data by query `SELECT time, value FROM example WHERE NAME = 'temperature' AND time BETWEEN...`.
The base 'time' column will be always first column of the SELECT query, even it is not specified in *fields* arguments.

```js
QUERY(
    'value',
    from('example', 'temperature'),
    between('last-10s', 'last')
)
```

### from()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `from( table, tag [, base_time_column] )`

It provides table name and tag name to `QUERY()` function generating SQL internally. It may equivalent to `... FROM <table> WHERE NAME = <tag> ...`.

- `table` `string` table name
- `tag` `string` tag name
- `base_time_column` `string` specify "time" column name, if omitted default is `'time'`.

### between()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `between( fromTime, toTime [, period] )`

It provides time range condition to `QUERY()` function generating SQL internally.
It may equivalent to `... WHERE ... TIME BETWEEN <fromTime> AND <toTime>...`.

- `fromTime` `string|number` time expressesion with 'now' and 'last' as string, Or assign number as unix epoch time in nanosecond
- `toTime` `string|number` time expression
- `period` `string|number` duration expression, Or assign number for the unix epoch time in nanoseconds. Logically only positive period makes sense.

You can specify `fromTime` and `toTime` with 'now' and 'last' with delta duration expression. 
For example, `'now-1h30m'` specifies the time that 1 hour 30 minutes before from now.
`'last-30s'` means 30 seconds before the lastest(=max) time of the `base_time_coolumn`.

If `period` is specified it will generate 'GROUP BY' experssion with aggregation SQL functions.

### limit()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `limit( [offset ,] count )`

It will be translated into `SELECT... LIMIT offset, count` statement.

- `offset` `number` default is `0`. if omitted
- `count` `number`

<!--### DUMP() -->

## CSV()

*Syntax*: `CSV( file(file_path_string) | payload() [,col(idx, type, name)...[, header(bool)]] )`

Load CSV and yield key-value records, the first field becomes the key.
The string parameter of 'file' should be absolute path to the CSV.
If `payload()` is used, it will reads CSV from HTTP POST request body stream. It is useful to make an API that writes data into database when remote client sends data by HTTP POST.

*Example)*

```js
// Read CSV from HTTP request body.
// ex)
// barn,1677646800,0.03135
// dew_point,1677646800,24.4
// dishwasher,1677646800,3.33e-05
CSV(payload(), 
    col(0, stringType(), 'name'),
    col(1, datetimeType('s'), 'time'),
    col(2, doubleType(), 'value'),
    header(false)
)
APPEND(table('example'))
```

Combination of `CSV()` and `APPEND()` as above example, it is simple, useful. Be aware that it is 5 times slower than command line import command, but stil faster than `INSERT()` function when writing more than serveral thousands records per a HTTP request.

Use `??` operator to make it works with or without HTTP POST request.

```js
CSV(payload() ?? file('/absolute/path/to/data.csv'),
    col(0, doubleType(), 'freq'),
    col(1, doubleType(), 'ampl')
)
CHART_LINE()
```

## FAKE()

*Syntax*: `FAKE( oscillator() | meshgrid() | linspace() )`

Genrating "fake" data by given method. For now only `oscillator()` is available.

### oscillator()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `oscillator( freq() [, freq()...], range() )`

Generating wave data by given frequency and time range. If provide multiple `freq()` arguments, it composites waves.

### freq()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `freq( frequency, amplitude [, bias, phase])`

It produce sine wave by time `amplitude * SIN( 2*Pi * frequency * time + phase) + bias`.

- `frequence` `number` frequency in Hertz (Hz).
- `amplitude` `number`
- `bias` `number`
- `phase` `number` in radian

### range()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `range( baseTime, deltaDuration, duration )`

It specifies time range from `basetime+deltaDuration` to `baseTime+deltaDuration+duration`.

- `baseTime` `string|number` 'now' and 'last' is available for string type, Or assign number as unix epoch time in nanosecond
- `deltaDuration` `string|number` duration expression, Or assign number for the unix epoch time in nanoseconds. ex) `'-1d2h30m'`, `'1s100ms'`
- `duration` `string|number` duration expression, Or assign number for the unix epoch time in nanoseconds. Logically only positive period makes sense.

### meshgrid()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `meshgrid(xsereis, yseries)`

It generates {key:index, value:[][][]{x[n], y[m]}}

### linspace()
{:.no_toc}

*Syntax*: `linspace(start, stop, num)`

It generates 1 dimension linear space.
