---
layout: default
parent: TQL API
title: MAP Functions
nav_order: 31
has_children: false
---

# MAP Functions
{: .no_toc}

1. TOC
{: toc }


## TAKE()

*Syntax*: `TAKE( n )`

Takes first *n* records and stop the stream.

- `n` `number` specify how may records to be taken.

## DROP()

*Syntax*: `DROP( n )`

Ignore first *n* records, it simply drops the *n* records.

- `n` `number` specify how may records to be dropped.

## PUSHKEY()

*Syntax*: `PUSHKEY( newkey )`

Apply new key on each record. The orignal key is push into value tuple.

For example, if an original record was `{key: 'k1', value: [v1, v2]}` and applied `PUSHKEY(newkey)`, it produces the updated record as `{key: newkey, values: [k1, v1, v1]}`.

## POPKEY()

*Syntax*: `POPKEY( tuple, idx )`

Drop current key of the record, then promote *idx*th element of *tuple* as a new key.

For example, if an original record was `{key: k, value: [v1, v2, v3]}` and applied `POPKEY(V, 1)`, it produces the updated record as `{key: v2, value:[v1, v3]}`.

## GROUPBYKEY()

*Syntax*: `GROUPBYKEY()`

Takes multiple continuous records that have same key, then produces a new record which have value array contains all individual values.

For example, if an original records was `{key:k, value:[v1, v2]}`, `{key:k, value:{v3, v4}}`...`{key:k, value:{vx, vy}}`, it produces the new record as `{key:k, value:[[v1,v2],[v3,v4],...,[vx,vy]]}`.

The *GROUPBYKEY()* works comparing the key of current record to previous one, if it found the key has been changed, then produces new record. As result it can makes a group only if the continuous records have same key.

## FLATTEN()

*Syntax*: `FLATTEN()`

It works the oposite way of *GROUPBYKEY()*. Take a record whose value is multi-dimension tuple, produces multiple records for each elements of the tuple reducing the dimension.

For example, if an original record was `{key:k, value:[[v1,v2],[v3,v4],...,[vx,vy]]}`, it produces the new multiple records as `{key:k, value:[v1, v2]}`, `{key:k, value:{v3, v4}}`...`{key:k, value:{vx, vy}}`.

## FILTER

*Syntax*: `FILTER( condition )`

Apply the condition statement on the incoming record, then it pass the record only if the *condition* is *true*.

For example, if an original record was `{key: k1, value[v1, v2]}` and apply `FILTER(count(V) > 2)`, it simply drop the record. If the codition was `FILTER(count(V) >= 2)`, it pass the record to the next function.

## FFT()

*Syntax*: `FFT()`

It assumes value of the incoming record is an array of *time,amplitude* tuples, then applies *Fast Fourier Transform* on the array and replaces the value with an array of *frequency,amplitude* tuples. The key remains same.

For example, if the incoming record was `{key: k, value[ [t1,a1],[t2,a2],...[tn,an] ]}`, it transforms the value to `{key:k, value[ [F1,A1], [F2,A2],...[Fm,Am] ]}`.